A bank for women, by women
By Sharda Vishwanathan interviews Ms. Chetna Sinha on 26 November 2016 
India

“Let me take you back in time, to 1995, the year when it all started. Kantabai, a blacksmith from a village called Mhaswad in the state of Maharashtra in India, walked up to me and told me that she wanted to save money and no bank in the village was ready to help her open an account. I wondered why, not until the next day, when I accompanied her and heard the same thing from all the banks. And what could be the possible reason for this? With the deposit amount being less than a dollar i.e. Rs.5-10/-(7-15 cents), it was too small a deposit for a bank to be able to maintain her account,” recollects Chetna Sinha, Founder of Mann Deshi Mahila Sahakari Bank, India’s first rural cooperative bank for women, by women. 

 
Kantabai’s case brought with it a new wave of financial empowerment activism that was spearheaded by Chetna. “It made me think about how I could help women like Kantabai who wanted to take ownership and control of their financial resources but had no institutional means and support to do so. And this was instrumental in my decision to start the Mann Deshi Mahila Sahakari Bank,” she explains. 

 
Financial planning, budgeting, savings conventionally are considered a male bastion with men taking over control of all the financial resources. Furthermore, in rural areas due to lack of robust financial infrastructure, one finds that women often have no access to financial resources. In addition to this, the financial schemes and services launched don’t take into consideration the varying base of clientele. Thus, when she first submitted the proposal to the Reserve Bank of India-RBI (India’s central bank), it was rejected as all the promoting directors (17 women from the village) had used their thumb impressions on the documents not knowing how to sign. A major challenge hereby was, the fact that the women were not literate. “It is unfair to assume that just because women can’t read or write, they can’t manage their money/ finances. To get the institutions to overlook illiteracy in the women was a major challenge for us,” says Chetna. 

 
But the challenge also turned out to be her best learning experience. Despite all odds, the women were steadfast in their determination and were very enthusiastic to overcome the barrier and learn to read and write. Thus, their learning journey commenced as they were taught basic, functional elements like, writing their name, their village name, how to sign, how to read names on bus stops and basic financial literacy skills which Chetna fondly refers to as the ‘functional literacy’ program. 

 
And six months later, this enterprising group of women together with Chetna revisited the Central Bank and made a strong case. 

 
“You rejected our proposal as we could not read and write. But we did not have access to schools when we were growing up and that is not our fault. Ask us to calculate the interest on any amount and we will do it. Let’s see who does it first, we or your officers without a calculator,” were their strong words to the authority hearing their proposal. 

 
That was the turning point and soon the Mann Deshi Mahila Sahakari Bank opened its door to women in the village of Mhaswad in 1997. 

 
Mobilizing the community was the next challenge ahead for the team. Most of the women in the village earned an income as street vendors, daily wage laborers, vegetable vendors or running a small tea shop from home.  And for these women, a constant flow of money was a prerequisite to conducting their everyday businesses. Thus, when Chetna spoke to them about going to the bank, they were reluctant as that meant losing out on a day’s business which they clearly could not afford. “Realizing that more and more women had to walk miles to visit banks due to lack of regular and affordable transportation, I thought why not take the bank to the women. That’s how we came up with our ‘door-step banking’ initiative”, says Chetna. The bank officers visited the fields, the marketplaces or the houses to engage with the women, explain to them the various plans and financial products available and the ways in which the bank could help improve their financial capacities. And to do this, Chetna and her team successfully embraced technology and used wireless devices to record data, collect savings, loan repayments and generate on-the-spot acknowledgment receipts for the bank’s account holders. 

 
Chetna’s mission did not end here. She wanted the best for the women in Mhaswad. The entrepreneurial spirit in her always sought new and innovative solutions towards enhancing user-experience and developing interventions in line with their needs. And her efforts in creating a biometric-based ATM access is a testimony to that. She tells us how she has always wanted the bank to evolve with times and adopt every new technology that the mainstream banks in cities and towns used. So when they wanted to issue ATM cards to facilitate easy withdrawals, they realized that the women were not very comfortable remembering PIN numbers. Thus, a biometric access system was implemented. 

 
Having implemented programs that now reached out to women from poor socio-economic backgrounds and who have historically been financially excluded, what according to her is the primary challenge in fully achieving women’s economic empowerment and financial inclusion? “Lack of training and awareness”, is her immediate response. “While implementing financial infrastructure and mechanisms are one aspect of providing economic access, it is imperative to parallelly train the women and create awareness for them to be able to make an informed decision.” 

 
In 2006, Chetna set-up the first Business School for Rural Women, the Mann Deshi Udyogini, where the women are trained in financial literacy, computer literacy, banking, personality development, other vocational subjects such as veterinary care, agribusiness, sewing and so on. As part of the financial literacy course, they train women on basics of money management such as how to save, how to plan and manage a budget, the essentials of loan repayment and the importance of savings, insurance, pension and other aspects of financial risk management. The vocational training course helps train women in areas around business creation and skills required to start small ventures such as screen-printing, tailoring, pottery with the help of mentors who guide the women at every stage of their business implementation. Similar to the door-step banking initiative, a mobile bus equipped with laptops and sewing machines operates across villages, making education accessible to all. They also run their own community radio through which they not only engage with the women on financial literacy skills but also create awareness on topics that are important to women and promote their development. 

 
Anita Kumbhar, a potter and an alumnus of the business school feels that her greatest takeaway was developing money management skills that now helps her record her business sales and transactions efficiently, in the process helping her track her savings and expenditures. management courses enhanced her business skills and helped her diversify her product line that served the communities in and around her neighborhood.  

 
“Women who participated in the financial literacy program, their savings increased almost 3 times, from an average of Rs.63/- (92 cents) a week to an average of Rs.185/- ($2.70) after taking the course. The financial literacy course also encouraged women to access better financial resources such as Banks, Self Help groups to save their money thus, moving away from the traditional sources such as piggy banks. Further, women who have taken the financial literacy course take out more loans as compared to the other women and these loans were used for more productive purposes such as starting their own businesses or expanding the existing ones”, notes Chetna while sharing the impact of these programs. 

 
With over 110,000 women and girls having graduated from the business school and with the community radio station reaching out to over 34,000 people every year, Chetna’s efforts in empowering women through sustainable capacity building interventions is indeed exemplary.  While setting up a social enterprise is both exciting and challenging, her approach that constantly engages with the communities and takes into consideration the ground realities is pathbreaking. Economic empowerment is one of the key foundations of gender equality. And the Mann Deshi Foundation’s holistic capacity building model is indeed a stellar example of using social entrepreneurship and innovation to promote the financial independence and economic empowerment of women. 

 
As I end my conversation with her, all I can think of is Nicholas Kristof’s quote from Half the Sky: “Talent is universal; opportunity is not.” For me, it’s changemakers like Chetna Sinha and her team that embody this quote by creating opportunities not only for these women but in the process for their entire community to unleash their full potential. 