My Journey from self-empowerment to empowerment to others- by  Manisha Kad

In May 2013, I left my job with my organization after 15+ years of working without break. I left my job because it was difficult to achieve work-personal life balance. The plan decided was to start a small company providing Embedded System Technology Services named as SAADH Embedded System Solutions. This risky step was taken to achieve work-life balance, flexibility, learning new things related to business and face new challenges. While working with organization I already had experience in project management and team handling. Initial thought was to try for business for 6 months to see how it goes. However, Things went smoothly and dropped the plan of job.

There were a lot of aims in my mind those could not be possible while working with organization. In organization, we must work in framework defined by organization with limited scope. This is not the case with business. Business is game with challenges and multi-player.

How I have empowered my employees:

I had started with team of 5 members and my friends as am external consultants. As part of skill development, I arranged external trainings for all employees. I was very keen about my team to take part in decision process. I had given them a lot of work freedom. I have provided work from home facility for young engineer women and flexible timing. Even if with small financial budget, I tried to give best training, good work. Along with daily project work, I also planned future skill development for them giving small assignments. To some extent it was successful however due to small funding it was not that perfect. Due to pressure from client, my team worked a lot in weekend too, however I tried to give compensatory off.

What I learnt from my business venture:

I had learnt a lot of things during this period. I had learnt to cope with work pressures. I had learnt time management. I had worked on my self-management. Through exercise and meditation, I learnt to keep myself physically and mentally healthy to keep focussed in worst situation

Journey towards social empowerment:

2015-2016 is proved to turning point in my life. This miracle journey started in mid of 2015. It was after I suffered setback in my business. I was having time to give myself. I analysed myself about business failure, conflicts I faced in my career in the past, politics and problem I was facing from people around me.

I realized problems are never ending. We need to change the perception to see the problems. I need to change my personality, need to change my bad habits so that I can face challenges or struggle in my life stress-free. From that time, Internet became my friend. I listened many videos from YouTube on personality development, management, leadership.  So, I focussed mainly on changing my bad habits. Let me thank to John Maxwell, Mitchel Adler for emotional Intelligence, John Assaraf about brain rebuilding techniques and about deciding and achieving goals of life whatever it may be personal or social or in career. 

I focussed on my fitness with priority, fitness of body as well as mind.  Daily exercising I made as natural habit. For brain or mind fitness I used meditation and some brain rebuilding techniques. I compared myself with my previous one instead of comparing with others. That made my struggle enjoyable and still achievable. Though I am not successful today, I have much clarity for reasons of my failure.

I started to see the world very differently, optimistically. Now I am more sensitive to my social responsibilities. I came across many social platform’s through social networking. I started to develop my global mindset. I would not say I am perfect however I am open towards positive change which is beneficial for me and others.

Who I am today?

I am self-empowered and ready to empower others. I am strong, confident and ready to take any challenge of life for me and others. I look at every situation of life positively to explore new opportunities. My aim is to make difference in lives of people through use of technology, to help to solve the social issues the world is facing, to create job opportunities through business, to help to achieve skill based training to all children to get equal opportunities for all and so on. I believe that we can achieve it setting our goals, proper planning to achieve those goals. When we have aim in life, we are alive. Aimless life is like death.

Thanks to Empower Women Platform. Because of this, I understood much more about my self-empowerment. I understand new concepts of gender equality and started to solve the problems in the life with new insights. How I can empower others who need help to improve in life?