#HerStory: Anandibai Joshi



Anandibai Joshi, born in 1865, was one of the first women physicians in India and she could have become one of the first Indian women to have received a graduate degree in medicine in the United States.

Born to an orthodox Hindu family, Anandibai was married when she was 9 years old to Gopalrao Joshi. He was a widower 20 years older than her. Her husband was a postal clerk. He was known for his progressive views on the education of women, which was not encouraged in India during those times. It is said that Anandibai decided to study medicine when she lost her baby at age 14 due to inadequate healthcare.

Her journey to studying medicine was not steady path. In 180 Gopalrao sent off a letter to Royal Wider, an American missionary, expressing his wife's interest in medicine, but upon receiving the response they found out they first needed to convert to Christianity. Since they did not agree with this request, they decided not to go through with it, but help came from the hands of Theodicia Carpenter. She had come across the letter to Wilder published in the Princeton's Missionary Review and offered accommodation for Anandibai in the United States.

Anandibai went to the Women's Medical College of Pennsylvania, but she was met with disapproval from the Hindu community prior to her departure. She addressed her community at Serampore College Hall, highlighting her desire to study medicine and her dream to open a medical college once she would return back to India.

Anandibai obtained her MD in 1886 while battling tuberculosis. Upon her return to India, she was met with great fanfare and was appointed the physician-in-charge for the female ward of the Albert Edward Hospital in Kolhapur. Sadly, due to her illness, she passed away a year later. Nevertheless, Anandibai remains an inspiration for women in India and worldwide. 

To recognise her achievements, the Institute for Research and Documentation in Social Sciences (IRDS), a non-governmental organisation from Lucknow, has been awarding the Anandibai Joshi Award for Medicine. Similarly, the Maharashtra government has established a fellowship in her name for young women working on women's health.