#HERstory: Savitribai Phule, a beacon of hope for women in the 19th century By Sangeeta Gadepalli on 04 December 2016 


“Go, Get Education
Be self-reliant, be industrious
Work, gather wisdom and riches,
All gets lost without knowledge
We become animal without wisdom,
Sit idle no more, go, get education
End misery of the oppressed and forsaken,
You’ve got a golden chance to learn
So learn and break the chains of caste.
Throw away the Brahman’s scriptures fast."
    - Savitribai Phule


In a vigorously patriarchal society where child marriage was religiously practiced and the Caste System was pervasive, Savitribai Phule and her husband, Jyotirao Phule were” India’s first-generation modern feminists” (Tiffany Wayne). Along with women’s rights, this couple fought long and hard to end discrimination by caste and gender. Savitribai Phule and her husband opened India’s first school for girls & Untouchables (the lowest caste) and a care center for pregnant rape victims and young widows. The Phule’s contributions have had a tremendous impact in catapulting India into an era of societal reform.

Savitribai was born in Naigaon, Mahrashtra in 1831 to a family of farmers. At the tender age of nine, she was married to 12-year old Jyotirao Phule. Assuming his name and bearing an unduly inappropriate burden of marriage, the children set off together to reform the societal perceptions deeply embedded in the core of the culture. Savitribai was taught to read and write by her husband. As one of the very few women bestowed with the gift of an education, Savitribai made it her life’s mission to impart this education to young girls. She and her husband worked tirelessly and founded India’s first school for girls and Untouchables.

In the 19th century, child marriage in India was a persistent practice where young girls were married off because the parents were unable to assume the financial responsibility of the girl. Paired with high mortality rates, this practice lead to a high number of young widows (girls widowed before attaining puberty). According to Hindu practice, these girls had to shave their heads and don mundane clothing so as to remain chaste for their late husband. Savitribai audaciously opposed these archaic practices and started a strike against the barbers to stop the shavings.

However, even in these times young widows often fell prey to the lustful eyes of their counterparts. Young girls were sexually exploited and when they were pregnant, they were ostracized from their communities for the sinful act. Often these young widows would commit suicide or foeticide to avoid being shunned by their families. Savitribai and Jyotirao helped these widows by opening a care center for rape victims.

In 1897, Savitribai and her adopted son, Yashwant, opened a clinic to treat patients affected by the Third Pandemic of the Bubonic Plague. During the course of treating an affected patient, Savitribai contracted the disease and died while serving a patient on March 10, 1897 (Wikipedia). Savitribai died as she had lived – serving those in need. The Phules were ages ahead of their time with their open-minded acceptance of people of all genders & castes and rejection of deeply bigoted practices. To this day, Mrs. Savitribai Phule is recognized for her brilliant contributions. In 2015, Pune University renamed their Institution to Savitribai Phule Pune University in her honour. Her legacy continues to inspire and motivate Indians to pursue a life of education that is blind to race, gender, or religion.

[sources: Wikipedia, IndiaToday] 


